# â›ª Truth

[![weather](weather.webp)](https://digital.nmla.metoffice.gov.uk/IO_8e707fd6-6550-423e-8260-300ffeea8a9f/)

Before the Internet, nobody knew how old Sean Connery was. You'd read his age in
a magazine, but the journalist hadn't seen his birth certificate. They were just
saying what someone else told them. In 1999 Generation X argued in the pub about
aliens at Area 51 or whether ghosts existed or not, and nobody really knew or
cared. True believers were either mentally unwell, or thought they knew better
because their parents bought an encyclopaedia set from a door to door salesman
for two grand. The final hours of the pre-truth era is one of some Dude saying
"Yeah? Well, you know, that's just like uh, your opinion, man"

Truth with a capital T emerged along with the global network. After the
Internet, Connery was born in Edinburgh on a damp and breezy Monday evening,
three weeks after another wash-out bank holiday. We know this for a fact, it
probably is. But having these facts makes us believe much more through osmosis.

For example, Jimmy Wales unironically believes that Wikipedia is without any
sort of bias. This is typical of people who believe in Truth, as Truth turns out
to be a double-edged sword without a handle. Truthers are as immune to
conspiracy theories as they are vulnerable to conspiracies. Rounders are BTFO by
thinking flat-earthers actually exist, that people actually believe the earth is
flat. I don't know whether the press are in on the joke, but they're not in the
business of truth so at the very least they're not one for the trophy cabinet.

In 2016, Trump's incredible commitment to tradition ushered in the post-truth
era, a brazen Falseness that outraged millennials. Pre-truthers shrugged,
he was just doing what happened through Truth and pre-truth before that, just
with so little skill that everyone could see it. Plus, pre-truthers can tell
when a politician is lying anyway; their lips move. If later generations are
given chance to adjust, before the next epistemology arrives, they would surely
become wise to this too. But the future is inbound and this is not looking very
likely.

Because personal truths that come next. Fractals of mass-manufactured deceit,
individualized, coherent and divisive lies delivered by the power of machine
learning. How convenient these truths are, and to whom, will seal the True fate
of the world.

Unable to see, we'll just have to wait.
