# ðŸ“š Pulp Monofiction

On a dusty shelf in the library of mind sits a book not very wide. Its title is
short fiction, and claims every book's inside. Open up the pages and it presents
a strange surprise: that every letter's different, these stories seem disguised.

To the untrained eye or those without time it's a random stream of glyphs, but
if you care to learn a language, you can map a story onto this. And if you share
this tongue with others and point them at this pad, then they can read your
story (if it doesn't drive them mad.)

This impractical tome allows a tale to be known by everyone who shares a code,
but they don't - and they won't - as that's not why it was made. The reason it
exists is this - to prove a point about our age. That words don't exist as ink
on a page, they're experienced when read. To read, interact is a physical act,
it stirs us; it moves us.

Binary's look is a lot like this book, without a language map it's a long stream
of crap - it looks like random bits. It's not a language for us humans, it's for
computer chips. A machine's code are the only words it knows, a tongue of
circuit wires. And as it reads, makes sense of it, it shifts it deep inside.
Where we see jumbled digits, it `mov eax, 5`. It knows, interacts - in a
physical act. This whirs it; it moves it.

To you or I its outputs are words or sights or sounds. We feel and hear and see
them, no matter how profound, these concepts are our story, one a chip knows
nothing of. It's one it has no language for as logic is enough. Our words could
never move it, it doesn't have the kit. Meaning to computers is ons and offs of
bits.

Screens can't feel the smiles they show, we can't feel the light they throw, and
speakers might push to and fro to music they could never know. A mic beside the
tree that fell, it felt it hit the ground, and felt electric signals, but didn't
hear a sound.  

When a program outputs tales of thoughts, they exist in us not it. Human words
live in human skulls, they're a tale of apes not chips. Even programs, they're
an us thing, a ballad of the bits. What it is is silicon, vibration, a clatter
of logic gates. They march to the beat of a digital clock, to them that's all
there is.
