---
title: "Hydropsychism: Water of Mind"
author: "Gareth Davidson"
date: "\today"
---
# Abstract

The mystery of consciousness has baffled philosophers for centuries, yet Hard
Problems remain. Current computational models rely on a strong emergentist
dualism, treating mind as a mathematical abstraction with no causal effect on
natural selection. Panpsychist models are elegant but fail to explain how
subjective experience integrates into unified selves.

This paper proposes **hydropsychism** - the hypothesis that **the self is simply
the water in and around neurons**. This view is a simple panpsychist model that
explains evolution of mind from the earliest stages, lacks paradoxes, matches
observation and leads to testable predictions. This opens up the door to
building conscious machines.

# Metaphysics

*Cogito, ergo sum* was a decent starting point, but Descartes didn't go far
enough; there are some other things that I am. I'm in a location, I experience
my surroundings and the passage of time, I feel, and more importantly - I choose
how to move; I have will. And sometimes, the will to think.

Monists, idealists and panpsychists successfully applied Occam's razor to the
thinking part, and reasonably concluded that there's no need for two different
mind and matter stuffs. Matter is what mind looks like from a distance, or, when
more generous with the blade, the totality of existence itself. And yet there's
still much more to slice away. An objective reality can emerge from a web of
subjective interactions, and having experienced both of those directly it is
rational to consider the objective world a second order effect. Space can be
framed so that distance is a relative compatability of the things within it -
the likelihood of interactions between them - rather than a boundless and
ghostly container. And as importantly as before - we know that choice is the
cause of our actions, and so without evidence to the contrary, we should assume
it's the same of other stuff.

If the cause of actions is choice rather than commandment, then physical laws
are our observations, and all we can observe is the statistical preferences of
mind-stuff. Having left the concept of natural laws and looking back from enough
distance, they resemble a cognitive bias at the heart of scientific tradition;
the quest to discover the laws of a rule-giver we have long forsaken. Our path
leads to a model of an entirely subjective and relative reality, one lacking
not only a creator and His laws, but is without a physical realm at all.

In this new model, mind-stuff is the only stuff and it acts according to its
will; it is and it does as it feels.

# Evolution of Mind

This position of "doing as it feels" reveals a simple mechanism by which mind
can evolve, and from up here we can see all the way back to abiogenesis.

When stuff chooses how to act based on what's around it, its actions then
change its surroundings, and this in turn changes how it feels. This simple
process allows for feedback loops where structure, feelings and action are
naturally selected. Selection pressures act directly on feeling and choice,
allowing them to evolve structurally, step by step - a process that is required
for sapient life to emerge naturally. The simplest molecules with the least
awareness, weakest feelings and minimally selectable actions are ratcheted up
the gradient of awareness and will to survive. Given enough time and
generations, it's entirely plausible that highly complex organisms could evolve
in this system, ones with staunch opinions informed by rich and complex
subjective experiences, that possess a force of will powerful enough to
transform the world.

If this is the system in which we live, there should be no visible boundary
at which subjective experience suddenly emerges, we would find none no matter
how hard we looked or believe there is one. Will to move should be present,
though less coordinated in organisms without nervous systems. It should be
present within the cytoplasm, an amoeba's pseudopods should extend and retract
with an apparent intent. White blood cells might chase down invaders with a
sense of urgency. The inner workings of the cell might show an eerie similarity
to creatures at larger scales, with no apparent bottom in sight. Slower moving
organisms like plants, when filmed and played back in high speed, should act
like animals struggling to survive. While anthropomorphism does not meet the
high bar of scientific proof, these observations provide clues, that once seen,
are very difficult to unsee.

## Supernatural Selection

There's no reason why animals with brains couldn't evolve in a deterministic
universe, such as a digital simulation of life. But without the selection
pressures tied to free will, they'd evolve as control-calculation organs rather
than feeling-about-moving ones.

Deterministic models like computationalism and mathematical functionalism are
free from will and offer no causal mechanism for the evolution of mind. Unless
they can demonstrate one, these symbolic dualisms are functionally
indistinguishable from evolution denial.

# Informational Awareness

By definition, subjective experience cannot be measured objectively. What
another system feels like remains beyond the reach of empiricism. This will be
true until we invent direct neural connections to other systems, allowing us
to share experiences and systematically document the qualitative properties of
physical structures. But first, we'd need a working, proven theory of
consciousness to guide the engineering effort.

In order to make one, we may be able to infer some things about subjectivity
by observing the behaviour of other systems.

In a universe where all action is choice, actions reveal information about an
preference or ignorance, but how much of each were involved is known only to the
chooser. Atoms on the surface of a gold bar are either blissfully unaware of the
call of the sky, or they strongly prefer to continue being gold. While we might
describe this as mass and electromagetism, and model it as in terms of protons,
neutrons and forces. But when forces are preferences, their carriers are
decisions. Neutrinos could be said to be either fickle or free, with no way to
know which. This seemingly absurd framing grants an insight: if stuff does as it
feels, then one way or another it feels very little about what it doesn't do.

Action as chosen interaction has implications for information theory too.
Firstly, we can apply Occam's razor here and conclude that there's no need for
randomness, unknowableness and entropy; they're lower bounds on possible
awareness, an experiential distance. This, in turn applies neatly to both
superposition and entanglement, both of which are exclusion of other observers
from the decision path.


todo:

* more potential for awareness in liquids than solids
* conclude that water does the moving, solids don't. protiens evolved to
  make the water want to move it.


# Hydropsychism

Having tackled the hard problem, the anthropic question, and the evolution of
mind - while dismantling determinism, computationalism, and spacetime itself -
let's do some real work. It's time to fix panpsychism. Or idealism. Maybe both.

todo:

* discuss physical processes in neurons
* 

## Is water special?

Does the hexagonal structure of water somehow align with the 3 spatial
dimensions, in a way that resonates with or provides access to the properties
from which space itself emerges? Does orientation play a part? Consider the
bouncing blocks model of pi.


# Experimental Predictions

# Implications for Neuroscience & AI

- **Why AI lacks true awareness:** Unlike a neural network, which is digital and discrete, **a water-based system has no static states**—it is inherently dynamic and continuous.
- **New directions for brain-computer interfaces:** If consciousness is fluidic rather than computational, **interfaces should target water-structuring mechanisms rather than synaptic transmission alone.**
- **Implications for life’s origins:** If water is the agent of awareness, then **consciousness is not a late-stage evolutionary trick, but a fundamental property of structured aqueous environments.**

# Conclusion: Little Bags of Thinking Water

Pratchett described human beings as "little bags of thinking water held up
briefly by fragile accumulations of calcium", and despite us all believing we
were the bag, it turns out he was right all along.

