# ðŸŽ² Rumblists


# TODO


Stuck in a flat Earth in a sealed box, our brightest minds seek to know the
source of rumblings, a mystery as old as time. And they



Up, down, charm, and strange

Say you live in a box and are perplexed by rumbling sounds that happen
periodically. You measure the incident times, which are totally unpredictable
with the information you have (being stuck in a box) but they follow an
interesting pattern. You create a probability function that fits the
measurements perfectly. The result is that you can predict these rumblings on
average with remarkable accuracy, other people in your box are impressed. Is it
fair to assume that the rumblings are actually random in nature? 

Does this apparent randomness prove that randomness underpins the nature of
reality? Is the mystery of the rumblings actually solved? Well it turns out the
rumbling sounds are actually buses driving past outside. What you have made is
a model, a busfunction that's a conjugation of the bus timetable and average
deviations from it due to variations in local traffic. But you don't know a road
is because you live in a box. There's no way out of the box, no way to learn
what a road even is and so the mystery of the rumbling sounds is actually
completely unknowable in your universe. But the fact that you modelled it as a
probability function led you to believe that buses themselves were random, and
this in turn led you to believe in randomness itself. That is faulty reasoning 
regardless. The problem is, we fundamentally cant tell the difference between
something that's unpredictable and something that's random. Whether I have a bus
timetable or not doesn't change that. And back on topic, randomness doesn't lead
to the evolution of minds.

Once upon a time, there were people who lived in a box. There was no way to ever
see outside the box, but 
