---
redirect_from: ['/home/gaz/Documents/thoughts/lens/words/']
---
# üìö Pulse Fiction

* [üì∫ video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cLZUJ5tchd0)

On a dusty shelf in the library of mind sits a book not very wide. Its title is
short fiction, and every book's inside.  When you open up the pages it presents
a strange surprise: that every letter's different, these stories seem disguised.

To the untrained eye or those without time it's a random stream of glyphs, but
if you learn or make a language, you can map a story onto this.  If you shared
this tongue with others, then they can understand; they can read your story by
proxy of your hand.

This impractical tome allows a tale to be known by those who share this code,
but they don't - and they won't - well, it's a point to be told.  It's a
statement by its maker: that words aren't ink or paper.  They're heard in your
head, as they're seen and they're read.  As to read, interact is a physical act,
it stirs us; it moves us.

Binary's look is a lot like this book, without a language map it's a long stream
of crap - and it looks like random bits.  It's not a story for us humans, it's
for computer chips.  A machine's codes are the words that it knows, and it's a
tongue of circuit wires.  Where we see jumbled digits, it feels `mov eax, 5`.
It reads and it makes sense of it, which shakes it deep inside. It knows,
interacts, in a physical act.  This whirs it; it moves it.

To you or I its outputs, these words or sights or sounds.  We feel and hear and
see them, but no matter how profound, these concepts are *our* story, one a chip
knows nothing of.  It's one it has no language for, 'cause logic is enough.  Our
words could never move it, it just doesn't have the kit.  As meaning to
computers is ons and offs of bits.

Screens can't feel the smiles they show, we can't feel the light they throw, and
speakers they push to and fro, to music they could never know.  A mic beside the
tree that fell, it felt it hit the ground, but felt electric signals, and
couldn't hear a sound.

When a program outputs tales of thoughts, they exist in us not it.  Stories
heard in human words live in apes but not in chips.  Even programs, they're an
us thing, *our* ballad of the bits.  While clattering gates in silicon just
switch vibrate and hiss.  By the click of the clock it is trapped to the track,
it's a physical act, and that feeling's all there is.

* [üîç back](..)
