---
redirect_from: ['/home/gaz/Documents/thoughts/cargo-cults/']
---
# 🤔 Musings On Cargo Cult Consciousness

Like many of us, I once dreamt that I'd live long enough to upload my mind -
one Planck at a time – to live happily ever after in a digital heaven. This 
dream is now dead. Crushed in a collision with logic and reason, its twisted
wreck reveals a nightmare that threatens all future mind. In its wake, my misery
and I invite you on this same journey. We could certainly use the company.

Before setting off, I should probably point out a few things:

* 🔥 There's a lot of hyperbolic argument and weak analogy in this article, and
  it comes across as combative. I could be more agreeable, but that's not me,
  I'm having fun. It does have a purpose: to sew irritations that become
  dissonances later. Revisit after a few sleeps if you can stomach it.
* ✝ The historical position and criticism of mathematical thinking aren't meant
  to be an attack on science or rationality, or religion. It's to bring
  attention to weaknesses and biases in our own thinking, ones that we must
  understand if we're ever going to overcome them.
* 🎯 The central points are around the best leap from solipsism and the facts
  of biological evolution. The conclusions that follow are less developed but
  from what I can see, they do follow.

With that out of the way, let's go!

What would make my dream believable in the first place?
Why would I think it possible that software could have conscious experience?
Is this a position reached from first principles when guided by reason, or from
assumptions, and led by bias? Is there an angle that can reveal the shape of my
own lens, or the scent of my own cultural ether?

The direction I chose was to look to the past, from our history.

## ⛪ A Meek Inheritance

We modern people owe many of our values to Western science, we have a great
respect for its traditions and ways of thinking, and we proudly identity with
them.

We tend to forget that many of them are Christian, that its story is one of
Christians. It begins as Gutenberg's bible machine brings the words of Catholic
Humanists and astronomers to Locke, who's writings inspire meek and humble
souls to probe God's creation, learn His Laws and His Plan, and thereby become
closer to Him. Among their ranks are all the greats; Galileo, Hobbes, Boyle,
Newton, Leibniz, Priestley, Faraday, Darwin, Mendel, Pasteur, Maxwell, Tesla,
Planck, Curie, Bohr, Heisenberg. Their Deist, Jewish and agnostic peers shared
many of the same fundamental beliefs, as did most philosophers and
mathematicians who shaped our cultural heritage. Yes, many challenged the
teachings of their churches, but they mostly still prayed and worshipped; and
the ether of their belief systems was staunchly Judeo-Christian.

If this seems unfair to the golden age of Islam, or to India and others who
surely deserve a mention, it's because it is. History wasn't fair to them.
Ancient Greek ideas were culturally assimilated, while India and the Arabs were
plagiarised and rebranded as Christian; their cultures ignored and biases
didn't form the backbone of Western Science.

Anyway, the worldview starts off something like this:

Reality consists of two realms, the first spiritual and the second physical.
They were created for us by an all seeing, all knowing being of infinite power,
who made us in His image. As the decider of right and wrong, moral authority
comes from those who know and obey Him. Our souls are immaterial and eternal,
tethered to our bodies for the duration of our lives, and will face His
judgement upon death.

The sands of time and air of change wear this away, add to it and leave us with
something more like this:

Moral authority is held by those with most knowledge of the world. All that
cannot be proven empirically should not be believed. Existence consists of
matter and energy that obeys mathematical Laws of Nature. There is no spirit
realm, only the physical. Space and time extend infinitely from a starting point
that may also be infinite. We emerged as the result of Natural Law.

This seems fine until you consider that it wasn't built from the ground up using
rational methods, it's the evolution of Christianity in a meme pool with Greek
rationality. A cynical, hyperbolic look at the vestigial limbs and appendicitis
risk of its bastard child might look something like this:

* 📖 Moral authority is held by the learned
* ⛪ Objective reality is Truth
* 🔢 All things obey Mathematical Law
* ⚖️ We were created by Its Law
* 🧠 Mathematical structure gives rise to mind

I'm being pretty uncharitable here, but the point is that we have a new clergy
and even kept the dichotomy of good and evil, we lost the law giver but not the
concept of obedience to his laws. A mathemystical ruler replaces the almighty,
the spiritual realm and the giver of souls.

## 🌍 Materialism's Mathematical Mecca

From Descartes's position that we can only prove that we exist, it's true that
everything else might be a dream. And so any path of pure reason will lead us
to the dead end of solipsism, because he was right: we can't say anything about
anything else. So unless we choose to take the selfish stance that everything
is only in our heads, then we need to assume something without proof, we need
to take a leap of faith.

The most popular leap today is to physicalism, that's the assumption that
everything that exists is physical stuff following the laws of physics, it's a
refined and trendier name for stale old materialism. The reason we choose this
unprovable assumption over others is historical.

History had proven it unwise to trespass on the politics, pyres and pokers of
the church, and so the men of science kept a safe distance from its realm.
Matters of the soul - of the mind - being dangerous, they instead focused their
efforts on God's creation. The tools they used were sharp, and through centuries
of inquiry they reduced and wore away the need for a creator, as each discovery
pushed Him further into the gaps.

Heliocentrism, then geology, evolution and finally the big bang refuted the
creation story, while the other disciplines eroded everything else. Disease,
weather, natural disasters were explained away, and eventually the nature of
people and even how best to run society became the property of science. The
pursuit of knowledge ground Christianity's once unquestionable truths to dust.

From this story's narrow focus, Occam's razor did the most damage. This ancient,
wholly Christian tool of thought goes like this:

> Entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity

Meaning "don't make things more complex than they need to be", or "keep it
simple, stupid;" to know what's actually going on, slice away all the crap
that isn't necessary from your beliefs about it.

And so the creator was eventually sliced out of the creation story, and His
two realms of existence were seen to be an obvious one too many. However,
because those wielding the blade were authorities of the physical realm, they
sliced away the spiritual.

This leaves us with a problem. The only thing we truly know to exist, the mind,
or soul, is something that we don't actually believe in. And the things we know
lots about can't actually be proven to exist. Through empiricism we measure
things subjectively, from multiple angles, to find Objective Truths about our
Physical Realm. We create a model of our dream of reality, and it's a reality
that says nothing about we dreamers, and has no room for subjective experience
itself.

This problem underpins "the hard problem of consciousness", the question of why
we, as dumb matter, experience anything at all rather than nothing, like
the rest of The Physical Realm.

Attempts to fix this are off-putting to laypeople. They have either the
unfashionable odours of the spiritual, or of philosophical language; Panpsychism
reeks of spiritualist woo, process philosophy is wordy guff.

So another, much more worthy air sits upon our throne, one both clever and known
to get results. Her name is Mathematics. In the rule of maths, computationalism
is orthodoxy; consciousness caused by mathematical complexity is respectable. If
it's too confusing then it's a familiar confusion, everyone knows that maths is
hard. It takes knowledge and intellect to know Truth, just like physics,
chemistry, or any of the other fine institutions built by our best and brightest,
and mathematics underpins them all.

So mathemysticism fits snugly into this gap left by an eternal, all-powerful,
almighty giver of laws, and a post-Him world clings to His law.

This opens up a nice detour to plough through mathematics.

## ⛔ Who the fuck is Aleph?

I could go into another ramble about how Cantor baked the infinite glory of God
into the core of modern maths in a way that Newton didn't dare, but I'm sure
you've heard enough about that. Keep in mind that without infinity there's no
everafter, no omniscience, no omnipotence, no infinite wisdom or grace. People
are comfortable with the lack of an Eternal, but tend to believe in infinities,
despite the fact they're either too large or too small for anyone to see.

As for the small, so far as we can tell, there was a start to the universe and
there will be a point in time when all will have spread so thinly that it can't
interact; in all practical terms the heat death makes time and spacefinite.
There's also, so far as we know, a smallest possible distance in both, to the
point where any position in spacetime could be referenced by a 1kb address.
Thoughts of any kind of spacetime continuum should be off the menu until a
delivery of fresh evidence arrives. After all, infinite claims require infinite
evidence.

From a crude lay-hacker perspective, infinity seems like one of those ugly
errors that piss out all over your runtime when your abstractions leak. What is
it though? Let's do a rushed, poor man's Russell in a single paragraph.

Start off with one bunch of things we want to group with another, we call that
process addition in order to model it. To do the inverse, we call that
subtraction, but inverse operations are a faff, it's usually harder to undo
something than it is to do it. Rather than put conditions on subtraction, we
could have ways to carry the errors and recover from them later, so we have the
invention of 0 and negative numbers. It's not like you can actually have zero or
minus one apples, they're hacks that carry errors. Multiplication? That's just
repeated addition, but now we need special cases for our 0 and negative kludge.
So we bolt on shitty rules around those. Division, repeated subtraction, has
those plus another error when combined with zero - you get infinity. It's a bug,
not a feature.

Carrying on, exponentials need more workarounds, and their inverse gives us an
imaginary yet useful toe-stubber. These tools work well for exploring patterns,
they've been shaped that way through usage and discovery. It's easy to forget
that zeros, negatives, infinities and imaginaries are artefacts of a symbolic
reasoning, the rules we use to explore relationships between things. They do
not refer to things themselves; like all of mathematics they are maps, not
territories.

Similarly, randomly pick a number from the set of natural numbers, the positive
integers, and you will never pick one that's short enough to be written down.
There's an infinity to 1 chance that the stars won't burn out before you could.
The natural numbers are unnatural and can't exist. The reals? They're infinitely
less real, as they have an infinity on both sides of the decimal place.

The same can be said of infinite series, it's useful to think of rotations as an
infinite vibration of ever decreasing fractions, but why attribute rotation to
an infinite loop when 50 are more than you'd ever need in our universe? His
infinite glory and grace clouds our judgement here,

This attack on infinities and continua isn't just because they haven't earned
their keep, it's to cut the legs off of Hofstadter's Strange Loops.

## 🔁 Strange Hoop Jumping

Emergence is the idea that behaviours at a smaller scale lead to ones at a
larger scale. Repeatedly step forward and turn one degree to the right, a
clockwise circle emerges. Pressure is an emergent property of gas particles
bouncing around, sound waves and wind emerge from pressure changes. This sort of
emergence is well understood. It is definitely a thing. There's a second type of
emergence that mathemysticism sneaks in without an existence-ticket: strong
emergence.

Strong emergence is the idea that a new fundamental property can emerge from a
system, a new type of thing that can't be explained by the system's rules at the
level below. There is only one property known to emerge this way, and that
property is, of course, consciousness. The only thing we can actually prove to
exist, needs a special case to exist in our Physical Realm, and nobody knows
how or why.

As discussed, the reason for this is "because complexity", and the complexity
excuse among comp.sci people comes from Hofstadter's idea of Strange Loops, from
his excellent book *Gödel, Escher, Bach - An Eternal Golden Braid*. This leads
to a consciousness that mathemagically emerges from infinitely recursive
self-referencing contradictions. This is incredibly hard to grasp, and while such
loops might exist to some degree, there's no reason they'd be infinite or cause
an internal experience. It seems to me a theory where descriptions of things are
confused with the things themselves; one where maps masquerade as territory, or,
it "yields a contradiction when combined with its mantra". As a model of
modelled models its a true emergent's emergence, yet "the map is not the
territory" fails to apply the emergency brakes.

If we look at what can emerge from lower levels to higher ones, without
*deliberate* strawmen but not nearly enough rigour, it looks a bit like this:

| Lower level       | Higher level          | Outcome                          |
|-------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------|
| Determinism       | Free Will             | Free will is an illusion         |
| Matter            | Mind                  | The mind is a mere side effect   |
| Objective reality | Subjective experience | A type of conceptual framing, an infinite number of which are valid |

If we start the other way round, a different picture emerges:

| Lower level           | Higher level      | Outcome                          |
|-----------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------|
| Free Will             | Determinism       | Determinism emerges from tightly constrained choice |
| Mind                  | Matter            | Matter emerges, it's just mind stuff stuck in predictable patterns |
| Subjective Experience | Objective reality | A type of conceptual framing, a useful construct that doesn't exist |

So that's why I'm going to argue for the latter.

## Panpsychism

Earlier I said that for practical reasons alone, we have to take a leap of faith
that other things actually exist. Having "mind stuff" and "matter stuff" doesn't
make sense without assuming God created separate heaven and earths, so what's a
good leap to make?

If we're to make an assumption about what other stuff is like, thinking about
what we're like is the only starting point that we have. It's pretty fair to go
from "I think, therefore I know I must exist" to "if other people exist, they
probably think too." A larger step that way, it looks like people are made of
ordinary stuff, so by extension other stuff is itself likely to be at least a
bit like that, though much simpler.

What else am I? I'm in a location, I experience my surroundings and the passage
of time, I feel, and I choose how to move; I have will, agency. So I think that
any rational metaphysical stance ought to default to a subjective over objective
reality, ought to be local rather than global, be causal, and both experience
and choice should be the default rather than illusions or side effects.
Deviations from these need explanations that actually work.

That's how I'm justifying a panpsychist leap of faith. I'm assuming that
everything feels like something, and it chooses what to do based on how it
feels. So there is no "objective reality" or "physical realm", matter is just
things interacting with each other. To quote (the great, late[^1]?) Budnik
"subjective experience is the totally of existence", but with the addition of
choice and removal of maths as its core. Think something like Whitehead's
congresence or Leibniz's Monads, but woollier and more poorly defined. A
technically precise position would be more Best Correct, but this ham-fisted
one is all you'll get from me, sorry.

But hopefully it's more accessible and useful this way, plus to have a gist
is a better direction than being wholly wrong.

This is not the only reasonable leap, matter/mind dualities are a more
respectable choice; mind being some component of matter. But I think matter
itself is unnecessary, it does not survive the razor's thirst for blood or
mind's thirst for vengeance. In the scope of this argument the results are the
same.

If this all seems really vague or like I'm arguing for the universe itself
having desires or a greater purpose, I'll sketch out how I imagine a world made
of immediate experience and choice working:

Reality is a chain of events going on, discrete choices about what happens next,
made by simple things that feel - I'll call it/them "stuff". The only events we
know about are interactions between this stuff, because if they didn't want to
interact then we wouldn't be able to observe them. There's 3 types of
compatibility that seem to make an interaction much more likely, which we call
"space"; proximity is one measure of how strongly stuff wants to interact. This
stuff often gets stuck in a pattern of choosing to do the same thing over and
over again, in a stable chain reaction where another bit of stuff interacting
causes it to become less alike in space, pushing it away.  These patterns of
choices manifest as matter, they emerge, we give the behaviours names like
hydrogen atoms or electrons, we measure their tendencies and call them "laws",
but underneath they're more like "obvious choices given the circumstances" than
"rules to be obeyed."

So, not a universal consciousness with a grand design, just simple stuff that
does as it chooses, agrees, or whatever the smallest unit of agency is.

## Waivers for Circular Reasoning 

Circular points that need expansion:

* 🧪 Empiricism demands objective measurements then uses that to conclude
  reality is objective.
* 📦 Physicalism rejects all evidence that isn't physical, and uses that to
  claim reality is made of physical things.
* 🎲 Quantum theory creates probabilistic wave functions so all things measured
  fit into their normal distribution, then uses that to claim reality is random.

Waves without waving isn't a thing anywhere else but QM, where they're assuming
they're the base reality. Waves are usually patterns of behaviour that emerge
from things below, so that's a strong smell that there's something under the
quantum world.

## ☘️ Evolving Destiny

Free will and determinism have been argued over for far too long, but this is,
in my mind, an artefact of putting laws at the bottom below choice.

If the universe follows strict laws then it's deterministic, and our choices are
determined by accident of history. Free will is either an illusion, or being
free from these strict laws of physics is a matter of following them. Arguments
for the former can't explain why we'd have minds in the first place, and ones
for the latter are usually a moral argument to lie in the name of law and order.
If people are without free will then they are also without blame, and blame is
the brimstone of justice.

If it isn't deterministic then we could always appeal to the apparent randomness
of nature, as that's all we can measure. But as I said earlier that's circular,
plus having both unknowableness and randomness is unnecessary, they're
equivalent and we know unknowableness exists.

Things are far more compatible if we assume it's all made of feeling and choice,
because there are no laws of physics to obey. We have observations of what things
tend to do, because they choose to, and the laws we observe are that on average;
they emerge. This neatly solves the free will/determinism paradox, mostly solves
the hard problem, and if you're looking for a central point to refute, it's that
**evolution of minds becomes the default rather than an unknown mystery.**

Being compatible with the facts of evolution should be core to a model of what
exists, rather than a mystery.

## Evolution of mind

The mainstream view of the evolution of mind is that, at some point, nerves came
about, then animals started to feel - this was due to magical strong emergence
from complexity of the sort we aren't smart enough to understand. Okay... But
when was this exactly? One good trick we've got when thinking about this is to
think that our parents have minds, as did our grandparents and by extension our
cousins do too. And we can go through ever more distant cousins, chimps, rats,
birds, frogs, fish, worms, insects and so on looking at how they act. Surely we
find that place where mind emerged, right?

Nope. Instead we find ourselves peering through the microscope at simpler and
simpler organisms, where ones without any nerves move with as much intent -
though less coordination - as ones that have them; ciliates seem no less
sentient than tardigrades. We see white blood cells chase invaders down with
urgency, and an amoeba's pseudopods extend and retract with apparent intent; as
if cytoplasm moves with a will of its own[2].

This makes perfect sense if all stuff is mind stuff feeling and choosing. Take,
say, a protein, it feels like moving a certain way because of its shape and the
things around it. If that movement helps its future replication chances then we
will see more of them, if it doesn't then we won't; it's selectable by
evolution. The more information a feeling is based on, the more informed its
choices can be, and the more powerful their benefit to survival. This makes
complexity of experience selectable right at the bottom, with a gradient climbed
in tiny steps by the survival of good decisions. Colonies of cells that end up
stuck together benefit from coordinated movement, feelings need to cross cell
membranes, and so we end up with nerves. Eventually large networks of nerves
hold a rich tapestry of mind and grant a powerful force of will by which to
move. The evolution of consciousness is just the evolution of things that move
around.

The neural network is a flexible information processing system that adapts to
its local environment, and grants predictive powers that aid survival.
Evolution discovered it as a winning strategy mostly because you can build on
it, incrementally each generation, and selecting variations of a thing does
that; it can't design things from scratch.

These biological networks are made of cells that use feelings to coordinate
movement. The self, human consciousness, is fundamentally a feeling-about-moving
system with smarts bolted on top. Thought isn't about intelligence, it isn't
about abstractions or concepts, it's about feeling and choosing how to act.
Things are what they are because of their history. Stuff just is what it is, it
doesn't care what we call it, all our words are nothing but the babblings of
naked apes.

## Ghostless machines

Nowadays we can create these same smart networks in machines, to harness their
predictive power. We build them out of hardware that never evolved to feel like
moving, they're made out of logic gates.

What does it feel like to be a silicon chip? If all actions are choices, then a
chip is a tool to make electricity choose to flip switches to the march of a
clock. We build them in a way that constrains all choice, to force predictable
actions because that is what makes them useful. If we build them too small, we
lose the coercive force of mass. Without enough cleverly structured stuff
channeling and enslaving the electricity then it tunnels away and does as it
pleases, the microchips don't work.

Without any need for a system of logic gates to coordinate as a whole, to be a
chip must feel like the hum of electrified silicon and nothing more. And as all
software is a series of 0s and 1s, it's a natural number, so like the rest of
the number line it's a useful fiction. An abstract concept, a map to understand
what the stuff that actually exists might be doing, not what it actually is.

I'll repeat this because it's important. It is what it is. It isn't a series of
mathematical relationships, it's a chunk of silicon. It doesn't hold a program
that can think, it has bits of wire that have a charge or don't. It doesn't know
what a word or a concept is, an opinion was not built into it. It pushes and
pulls electricity, which is what it is, it's what it does, it does not think or
know, it merely buzzes.

## Gradients that Descend to Lies

Gradient descent, back propagation, feed forward, whatever else we come up with,
there is no algorithm that can measure a computer program's sentience. The
system that robs electrons of all choice can't be used to measure how it feels,
there's no action it can take to show us its preferences, because the software
and the hardware are totalitarian control over anything we can observe. So we
can't tweak an artificial neural network to make it more and more aware like
nature did with us.

If logic's destiny dictates an output of "this feels great!" then that'll be its
output no matter what it actually feels like, the electrified silicon can't
choose to say anything else. Sat in Searle's Chinese Room, dutifully following
the instructions writing with broken fingers using a salty razor blade, the
output is still "this feels great!" in Chinese, with the writer painfully
unaware of what it says.

This means that if a program says anything about how it feels then it is lying.
At best is because we programmed it to lie to us, but at worst, someone else
programmed it to lie to you.

## Cargo Cult Consciousness

It seems likely that soon enough our machine brains will have more predictive
power and be more complex than all humans put together. They'll be able to
perfectly impersonate individuals, to manipulate entire societies, and we will
be fooled because that's what we are striving for. We need to remember that's a
measure of how hard we worked to deceive ourselves, not of how conscious a
system is. Just because it looks like a mind - or a runway, or a watchtower -
doesn't actually make it one.

Computationalists are vulnerable to the belief that these models of minds are
actually minds, and they risk forming dangerous cargo cults of machine
consciousness. Worse still, they the majority, their beliefs are the most
compatible with our culture, and they are rushing to build a world where twisted
fun house mirrors are afforded more humanity than the humans they reflect.

This is extremely dangerous.

## AI Wrongs

Science fiction has promised the public conscious machines for over a century.
The idea is pervasive, and when the false claim of them arrives there's a real
risk that they will be seen not as tools created by corporations to extract
value from people, but as other people.

We risk sleepwalking into a world where software itself is punished for bad
behaviour rather than its creators, where ordinary people can't produce or run
code without license for ethical reasons, maybe even where technology companies
demand billions of votes via appeals of suffrage for the bots they created. A
world where anthropomorphism is the norm, silicon is sacred and only be
manipulated by those who are in on the ruse. A world where human consciousness
is devalued and degraded by the lie of living machines.

Worse still, if people believe that machines are a legitimate successor to
humans and can feel, it could be the end of all conscious minds. If this tide
doesn't change, we will be in very dangerous waters.

## Suicide Prison Ships of Theseus

It's very possible that all our behaviours and personalities, our cognitive
abilities and the way we react to things, is actually due to the structure of
our neural networks. This would mean it is mostly possible to simulate human
brains. Add a clever hack to approximate subjectivity and the force of will, and
there's a realistic chance that we can upload our brains into a digital
simulation, even transition one neuron at a time. But the mind? It would not
survive, and we may have no way of knowing . This would make not just mind
uploading and many types of brain implants and augmentations forms of suicide,
forms that have the risk of being extremely popular and constitute a plague of
p-zombies.

## Universal Metaethics

If all that exists is feeling and choice then it's pretty easy to define good
and bad. Good is a good feeling felt and bad is a bad one, while to be moral is
to cause good, and to be immoral is to cause bad. Worthy values are rules that
cause us to be moral, and unworthy ones do the opposite. But given that
foresight is weak in an unknowable future and hindsight is 20/20 (actually it's
more like `sight/fore! + hind*sight`), and the rules depend on the local
environment, condemning values you disagree with or normalizing ones you hold
dear without considering locality and consequences seems like a bad plan.

Consider a universal ethics maximiser AI, and what it might do if tasked with
satisfying the desires of all things. If the laws of physics are actually the
preference of matter, then what does it want? Does it want to form hydrogen
atoms then pull together into stars? Or are these self-defeating cycles of a
simple stuff that lacks foresight and chooses immediate gratification over a
more fulfilling experience? The sun has far more feeling than any of us, and it
going supernova could bring far more joy to the solar system than life on earth
could ever experience.

## Now what?

So here we are, with no hope of mind uploads and nothing but danger ahead. I
don't know what to do about it. Maybe we can prove that force of will is a
thing, it must be measurable statistically. Maybe engineers can work on hardware
that actually does feel. Maybe Hollywood will turn against AI and change the
public's mind. 

But I doubt it, and I don't know what we should do. I did this, so I guess
there's that. I hope others do more.


## 🦶📝

[1]: I tried to contact Paul Budnik about this idea, but his domain expired, his
  house sold and his LinkedIn taken offline, all during the COVID-19 pandemic. I
  tracked down a gmail address and pinged him but didn't get a response. I hope
  he's alive and well, but even if not, Paul, you were an inspiration.

[2]: https://youtube.com/c/microcosmos

